Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
NESTED GREEDY SEARCH FOR TOOL SELECTION
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
ABSTRACT
1
PRELIMINARY
1.1
FORMULATION
Tool selection for LLMs is essentially a complex combinatorial optimization problem. When the candidate tool
library is vast, exhaustively evaluating all tool combinations is impractical (NP-hard). While standard greedy
algorithms are efficient, they often fail to account for the complex interactions between tools.
1.2
LIMITATION OF NGA
Algorithm 1 Nested Greedy Algorithm (NGA)
Input: Ground set V ; budget b; solution-set size k
Output: Solution set S
1: S ←∅
2: for j = 1 ... k do
3:
Xj ←∅
4:
for t = 1 ... b do
5:
v∗←arg maxv∈V \Xj ∆pS(v | Xj)
6:
Xj ←Xj ∪{v∗}
7:
end for
8:
S ←S ∪Xj
9: end forreturn S
In LLM tool selection and complex reasoning tasks, the traditional Nested Greedy Algorithm (NGA)—while
theoretically overcoming the constraints of strict submodularity—exhibits significant drawbacks in practical engi-
neering deployment. The Evolutionary Nested Greedy Algorithm (ENGA) was introduced specifically to address
these pain points.
Limitations of NGA
Explosive Computational Overhead (Computational Intractability): NGA’s inner loop re-
quires frequent calculation of the marginal gain ∆. Applying NGA directly to LLM tool selection implies that
evaluating each candidate tool necessitates a full rollout or forward inference pass using the large model. For a
vast tool library V, the resulting O(|V|2) cost in terms of LLM API calls is unacceptable regarding both time and
financial expense.
Myopic Heuristic Bias: NGA relies on a predefined, static objective function h(S). In complex agentic scenarios,
the ”quality” of a tool is multidimensional (encompassing relevance, mutual exclusivity, latency, and token costs).
It is difficult for human experts to arbitrarily determine a perfect, static weighting ratio. If the initial objective
function is poorly defined, NGA will steadfastly converge to a suboptimal solution.
Vulnerability to Local Optima: Although NGA possesses greater ”lookahead” capability than standard greedy
algorithms, it fundamentally follows a deterministic greedy path. Once an erroneous choice is made early in the
outer loop (e.g., selecting a ”poison” tool that appears relevant but fails to synergize with others later), NGA lacks
a backtracking mechanism and cannot escape the trap of local optima.
ENGA (Advantages of ENGA)
Drastic Reduction in Computational Complexity (Decoupling Inference from
Search): ENGA completely decouples expensive large-model inference (fitness evaluation) from the inner-loop
construction of the candidate set. The inner loop utilizes a lightweight proxy function ˜∆—controlled by hy-
perparameters α—to perform ultra-fast computations (involving only vector dot products and scalar operations).
1


--------------------

